Infra external platform type draft (#1)
lobziik/enhancements: enhancements/cloud-integration/infrastructure-external-platform-type.md

OpenShift can not be disabled and still requires a signal about underlying platform, for example KCM and MCO in respect of enablement of
[external cloud controller manager](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cloud-controller/)

Examples of difficulties which are present today due to having a predefined list of platforms:
- No defined mechanism to set `--cloud-provider=external` arg to kubelet/KCM/apiserver without merges and further revendoring of "openshift/api"
- No way to extend machine-api and deliver new provider without merges to "openshift/machine-api-operator" and "openshift/api" repos

### User Stories

- As a cloud-provider affiliated engineer / platform integrator / RH partner
  I want to have a mechanism to signal Openshift's built-in operators about additional
  cloud-provider specific components which should be delivered and managed by its own or manually.
  
  We are aware about examples of supplementing OKD installations with a custom machine-api controllers,
  however users are experiencing a lot of difficulties on this path due to necessity of, literally, reverse engineering,

>   manual management of generic MAPI controllers and so on.

Reviewer: imo, we should give an example through the user stories. i think the first story is good but we should have something with specifics so that other readers know what we are talking about.

for example,

As a cloud provider whose platform is not integrated into OpenShift, I want to have the Cloud Controller Manager for my infrastructure running in OpenShift from the initial install. Having a platform type that allows for the addition of operators which perform platform-specific functionality would help me to create better integrations between OpenShift and my infrastructure platform.

- Make cloud-provider integration process more accessible and simple to external contributors as well as for RH engineers
- Provide a top level description of the operation mode for affected components at the first steps
- Introduce a somewhat "neutral" platform type, which would serve as a signal about underlying cloud-provider presence

### Non-Goals

- describe concrete delivery mechanisms for cloud-provider specific components
- cover new infrastructure provider enablement from RHCOS side
- describe specific changes for each affected component, aside no-op reaction to thew new "External" platform type

## Proposal

Extend the [PlatformType](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/51f399230d604fa013c2bb341040c4ad126e7309/config/v1/types_infrastructure.go#L128) "enum"
with a special value "External". Which would be similar to the "None" value during initial phase, but alongside adding support of this across
infrastructure related components it would change its semantic to signal when OpenShift is running on an infrastructure platform
that will receive supplemental components from the infrastructure provider.

### Implementation phases

> For make such change implementation process more smooth, it would be natural to split this activity to phases.

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
To make the change implementation process more smooth, it would be natural to split this activity to phases.
```

Reviewer 2: This nit wasn't implemented

> Proposed phases breakdown might be found in [OCPPLAN-9429](https://issues.Red Hat.com/browse/OCPPLAN-9429).

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
The proposed phases breakdown can be found in [OCPPLAN-9429](https://issues.Red Hat.com/browse/OCPPLAN-9429).
```

- "@JoelSpeed"
creation-date: yyyy-mm-dd
last-updated: yyyy-mm-dd
tracking-link:
- [OCPPLAN-9429](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPPLAN-9429)
- [OCPPLAN-8156](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPPLAN-8156)
see-also:
- [OCP infrastructure provider onboarding guide](https://docs.providers.openshift.org/overview/)
- [Out-of-tree cloud provider integration support](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/cloud-integration/out-of-tree-provider-support.md)
- [Platform Operators Proposal](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1170)
- [Capabilites selection](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md)
---

# Introduce new platform type "External" in the OpenShift specific Infrastructure resource

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

> This EP describes an addition of the new special platform type, referred here as "External".

Reviewer: grammar nit
```suggestion
This EP describes the addition of a new special platform type, referred here as "External".
```

> Such new platform type would serve as a signal when OpenShift is running on an infrastructure platform

Reviewer: this reads a little odd, i might start this paragraph like "The new External platform type would ...."

i think we should make it clear that the supplemental components will be infrastructure specific things that are designed for the platform. i want to make sure this doesn't get confused with more general platform operators, although a provider is free to include those as well.

that will receive supplemental components from the infrastructure provider.

“External” is different from our current platform types in that it will signal that the infrastructure
is specifically not “None” or any of the known providers (eg AWS, GCP, etc).

## Motivation

> At the moment [Infrastructure](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/51f399230d604fa013c2bb341040c4ad126e7309/config/v1/types_infrastructure.go#L14)

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
At the moment the [Infrastructure](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/51f399230d604fa013c2bb341040c4ad126e7309/config/v1/types_infrastructure.go#L14)
```

> resource serves as a main source of information about the underlying infrastructure provider and provider specific parameters.

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
resource serves as a primary source of information about the underlying infrastructure provider and provider specific parameters.
```

if you like keeping "main source", then i would suggest this
```suggestion
resource serves as the main source of information about the underlying infrastructure provider and provider specific parameters.
```

> Specifically [PlatformSpec](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/51f399230d604fa013c2bb341040c4ad126e7309/config/v1/types_infrastructure.go#L47)

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
Specifically the [PlatformSpec](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/51f399230d604fa013c2bb341040c4ad126e7309/config/v1/types_infrastructure.go#L47)
```

and [PlatformStatus](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/51f399230d604fa013c2bb341040c4ad126e7309/config/v1/types_infrastructure.go#L65) parts

> of the infrastructure resources holds that data.

Reviewer: i think you can drop the "holds that data" part
```suggestion
of the infrastructure resources.
```

> Given that PlatformSpec and PlatformStatus defined as a "discriminated unions" and require to have platform type encoded within

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
Given that PlatformSpec and PlatformStatus are defined as "discriminated unions" and are required to have the platform type encoded within
```

> "openshift/api" beforehand, it creates significant footprint and plenty of effort from RedHat engineers to initial technical enablement of

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
"openshift/api" beforehand, it creates a significant footprint and plenty of effort from Red Hat engineers to create the initial technical enablement of
```

> a new cloud-provider and mostly impossible without RedHat engineering engagement.

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
a new cloud-provider and mostly impossible without Red Hat engineering engagement.
```

Since a lot of infrastructure related components (such as [CCCMO](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-cloud-controller-manager-operator), [Machine API operator](https://github.com/openshift/machine-api-operator), [Machine Config Operator](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator), and so on)

> requires an information about, at least, presence of underlying cloud-provider - "None" platform does not suite well as a signal in such situation.

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
require information about, at least, the presence of an underlying cloud-provider, the "None" platform does not fit well as a signal in such situation.
```

> Having special, built-in and somewhat generic, platform-type which will signal about presence of underlying infrastructure platform without

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
Having a special, built-in,  and somewhat generic platform type which will signal about the presence of an underlying infrastructure platform without
```

> platform specific details might help to reduce a number of pull-requests across OCP repositories

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
platform specific details will help to reduce the number of changes across OCP repositories
```

> and simplify initial integration work for external to RedHat contributors.

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
and simplify the initial integration work for non-Red Hat contributors.
```

additionally, i think we should also mention that the "external" platform will help us to identify support cases, and alsp where the responsibility lies with respect to platform integrators that utilize the new platform type.

In the future, at some degree, [capabilites selection](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md)
API might help to solve the issue and give a room for supplementing *some* platform dependant components, however some integral parts of 
OpenShift can not be disabled and still requires a signal about underlying platform, for example KCM and MCO in respect of enablement of

> [external cloud controller manager](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cloud-controller/)

Reviewer: i think the example is great here, but we should be more definitive about how we want to use the capabilities. we will use external platform in combination with capabilities to know how our components will react on these style of deployments.

a great example here of how we will use capabilities with the platform type is the MAO and how we want to run the generic controllers. if platform "external" is specified and the "machine api" capability is enabled, then the MAO will know what to do.

> Examples of difficulties which presents now due to predefined list of platforms:

Reviewer: i might change the wording up a bit here
```suggestion
Examples of difficulties which are present today due to having a predefined list of platforms:
```

  however users are experiencing a lot of difficulties on this path due to necessity of, literally, reverse engineering,
  manual management of generic MAPI controllers and so on.

### Goals

- Reduce the necessity to make changes in "openshift/api", "openshift/library-go" and dependant infrastructure related components during basic cloud-provider integration with OpenShift
- Make cloud-provider integration process more accessible and simple to external contributors as well as for RH engineers
- Provide a top level description of the operation mode for affected components at the first steps
- Introduce a somewhat "neutral" platform type, which would serve as a signal about underlying cloud-provider presence

### Non-Goals

- describe concrete delivery mechanisms for cloud-provider specific components
- cover new infrastructure provider enablement from RHCOS side
- describe specific changes for each affected component, aside no-op reaction to thew new "External" platform type

## Proposal

Extend the [PlatformType](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/51f399230d604fa013c2bb341040c4ad126e7309/config/v1/types_infrastructure.go#L128) "enum"

> with a special value "External". Which would be similar to the "None" value during initial phase, but alongside adding support of this across

Reviewer 2: Is this being similar to None just because nothing will have implemented it yet?

Reviewer: in essence yes, as part of the epic that we put together for this work we defined a 3 phase approach to implementation. the first phase is creating the enhancement and identifying needed capabilities. the second phase will involve making sure that the new platform type does not disrupt the current openshift operation. phase 3 will involve modifications to the operators so that they do specific things when seeing an external platform, this will be highly dependent on what each operator requires.

Reviewer 2: IMO we should describe the intended end state rather than the implementation details at the `Proposal` section of the enhancment. You can talk about the phases and stuff later but the `Proposal` should be a high level what are we going to achieve at the end of this project

2. Creating dns provider on some platforms. This logic does not engaged for "None" or unknown PlatformType

For initial phases of this effort none extra changes aside updating "openshift/api" to the operator needed.

Speaking about `LoadBalancer` EndpointPublishingStrategy - Cluster Ingress Operator might be reconfigured for using it
as day2 operation. Operator itself  creates `Service` objects with correct provider-specific annotations, actual handling
of such objects happens in a provider-specific [cloud controller manager](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cloud-controller/).

#### Cluster Storage Operator

Cluster Storage Operator would go to no-op state if it encounters PlatformType "None" or unknown PlatformType.

At this point nothing requires storage to be there during cluster installation and storage (CSI) drivers might be supplimented
later via OLM or some other way as day 2 operation. So, no changes would be needed there.

#### Cluster Network Operator

### Workflow Description

Since proposed change intended to have no effect during initial implementation, no specific user interaction is expected.

> "External" platform type would be threatened the same as "None" platform.

Reviewer 2: `treated the same` I think

### API Extensions

A new optional constant of `PlatformStatus` type will be added to the "openshift/api".

```go
const (
	...
    // ExternalPlatformType represent generic infrastructure provider. Provider-specific components should be supplemented separately.

>     // At this point treats the same as "None" platform.

Reviewer 2: I probably wouldn't add this comment as we are expecting this to change quite quickly no?

Author: This behaviour planned to be so for an entire release, and, IIRC this comments affects documentation. We could omit this, but i would prefer to communicate it clearly.

    ExternalPlatformType PlatformType = "External"
	...
)
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

TBD

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Support burden
There is concern that *random* customers will use this feature out of context
and create support burden. However, using of such platform type in conjunction with [capabilites selection](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md)
could give us a clear signals about how to properly triage 3d party created replacements for Red Hat components.

#### API changes gating
Unfortunately, there seems no reasonable way to gate PlatformType addition

> with the feature gate, since it is an extension of already released core API.

Reviewer 2: We are introducing the ability to have different CRDs for stable vs TPNU clusters so the validation of the platform type field on the infrastructure object can be used to gate this

Current approach with having statically defined platform list is already there, quite transparent and battle hardened.
Changing it with adding new, way less specific platform type would mean a significant step away from current design patterns in this area.

Also, future support strategy is not completely clear due to we have plans around enablement of 3d party platform-specific components, which
codebase would be mostly out of our control. 

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

- Should we explicitly communicate that "External" platform is something which we are do not support yet?
- Do we want to extend IngressController API to provide a platform-agnostic way to supplement LoadBalancer type Service with an annotations? (? TODO consider removal)

### Test Plan

At a first stages we need to ensure that all OpenShift built-in operators treats "External" platform type the same way as "None".
For this - existing infrastructure and mechanisms which uses for exercising topologies with "None" platform type might be used.

### Graduation Criteria

Given that `infrastructure.config.openshift.io` already released and have to be supported during whole major release lifecycle,

> this change will be GAed from the beginning.

Reviewer 2: We can make this tech preview now, see my other comment

For make such change implementation process more smooth, it would be natural to split this activity to phases.
The proposed phases breakdown can be found in [OCPPLAN-9429](https://issues.Red Hat.com/browse/OCPPLAN-9429).

This document intended to describe initial phases of this project, proposed initial course of action:

1. Update "openshift/api" with adding "External" PlatformType
2. Ensure that all Red Hat operator tolerate the "External" platform and treat the same as "None" platform

Next phase out of the scope for this EP:

3. Modify operators for doing specific things when seeing "External" platform. Briefly it would be described down below, where possible for the moment.

### Future work

There are a number of topics in this area which would be wise to defer for upcoming phases, namely:

1. Define missing capabilities and its concrete behaviour, for example add a "capability" for machine-api
2. Precisely define reaction of the operators listed below for the "External" platform type 
3. Define and document concrete mechanism for supplement cluster with provider-specific components during installation time (CCM, MAPI controller, DNS controller)

### Affected components

> This section intended to enumerate OpenShift's components and briefly elaborate the future plans around this proposal.

Reviewer: i would drop the "intended to" part, just say
```suggestion
This section enumerates OpenShift's components and briefly elaborates the future plans around this proposal.
```

> During initial implementation we must ensure that all OpenShift's components treat "External" platform in the same way as "None" for do not disrupt the current openshift operation.

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
During initial implementation we must ensure that all OpenShift's components treat "External" platform in the same way as "None" to ensure we do not disrupt the current openshift operation.
```

> In the future we will need to change components behaviour to be able to receive supplemental provider-specific components from an infrastructure provider

Reviewer: this is slightly confusing to me, i might word it like this:
```suggestion
In the future we will need to change the behavior of OpenShift components to be able to receive supplemental provider-specific components from an infrastructure provider
```

or, if a component manages something else (i.e. kubelet, kcm), adjust its behaviour (set `--cloud-provider=external` arg to kubelet for example).

> Specific component changes would be described in details within separate enhancement documents on a per-component basis.

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
Specific component changes will be described in details within separate enhancement documents on a per-component basis.
```

#### Machine Config Operator

Currently, MCO sets kubelet flags based on a [PlatformStatus and PlatformType](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/7babc03f84088f49072c6f5b0d1769850d09a694/pkg/controller/template/render.go#L343).
Such flag is [crucial](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/running-cloud-controller/#running-cloud-controller-manager) for Cloud Controller Manager engagement withing the cluster.

Initially, new "External" platform should be treated similarly to PlatformType "None" by the MCO, and do not set up any cloud-specific flags for the kubelet.

> Then, down the road, it would be expected for the MCO to use "External" platform type as a signal about underlying platform presence and operate accordingly.

Reviewer: i think it would be nice to reference the "phase 3" part of timeline in addition to saying "down the road", so that people know how far down the road we are talking about. and perhaps mention that we might need changes to the PlatformSpec/Status.

Author: added notion in brackets with link to the respective section

#### Kube Controller Manager Operator

Same as the [MCO](#machine-config-operator) in regard to kubelet, Kube Controller Manager Operator manages KCM (kube-controller-manager) deployments.

Historically Kube Controller Manager was a home for cloud-specific control loops. This logic is also engaging by setting up proper
flags on KCM executable like,
```shell
...
--cloud-provider=azure
--cloud-config=/etc/kubernetes/cloud.conf
...
```

Same as for kubelet, for external Cloud Controller Manager appropriate `cloud-provider` flag should be set for the KCM executable.
Alternatively it's also allowed to not specify `cloud-provider` flag at all.

#### Cluster Cloud Controller Manager Operator

> Responsible for deploying platform-specific Cloud Controller Manager as well as for handle a number of OpenShift's

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
Responsible for deploying platform-specific Cloud Controller Manager as well as for handling a number of OpenShift's
```

specific peculiarities (such as populating proxy settings for CCMs, sync credentials and so on).

During first phases of the "External" platform type enablement this operator should be just disabled.

> In future, when delivery mechanism for CCMs would be defined, might be engaging for deploy user-provided cloud controller manager,

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
In the future, when the delivery mechanism for CCMs will be defined, the operator might be engaged for deploying user-provided cloud controller manager,
```

however this is a subject for the upcoming design work. 

#### Library Go

Significant part of the code around PlatformType handling lives in the ["openshift/library-go"](https://github.com/openshift/library-go/blob/e1213f6ec5d10aa4aa8a4cac2780b1dc674c0396/pkg/operator/configobserver/cloudprovider/observe_cloudprovider.go).

> For the moment, this code is responsible for decision around kubelet and kcm flags. Precisely, [IsCloudProviderExternal](https://github.com/openshift/library-go/blob/e1213f6ec5d10aa4aa8a4cac2780b1dc674c0396/pkg/operator/configobserver/cloudprovider/observe_cloudprovider.go#L154) function

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
For the moment, this code is responsible for the decision around kubelet and kcm flags. Precisely, [IsCloudProviderExternal](https://github.com/openshift/library-go/blob/e1213f6ec5d10aa4aa8a4cac2780b1dc674c0396/pkg/operator/configobserver/cloudprovider/observe_cloudprovider.go#L154) function
```

> uses for decision around kubelet and KCM flags (within MCO and KCMO respectively). Also this code is using for the decision-making about CCM operator engagement.

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
is used for decisions around kubelet and KCM flags (within MCO and KCMO respectively). Also this code is used for the decision-making about CCM operator engagement.
```

#### Machine Api Operator

> Machine Api Operator is responsible for deploy and maintain the set of machine-api related controllers, such as

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
Machine Api Operator is responsible for deploying and maintaining the set of machine-api related controllers, such as
```

- machineset controller
- nodelink controller
- machine health check controller
- machine controller

From the list above only "machine" controller is cloud-provider dependant, however, for now Machine Api Operator
won't deploy anything in case if it will encounter "None" or unrecognized platform type. 

In the future "External" platform type would serve a signal for Machine Api Operator to deploy only provider-agnostic 

> controllers, which would leave a room for the user to supplement only machine controller and do not reverce engineer and

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
controllers, which would leave room for the user to supplement only the machine controller and not to reverse engineer and
```

> replicate everything what MAO does.

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
replicate everything that MAO does.
```

At this point nothing requires storage to be there during cluster installation and storage (CSI) drivers might be supplemented
later via OLM or some other way as day 2 operation. 

Actually, no particular changes in regards of the "External" platform type introduction are not expected there.

#### Cloud Credential Operator

Cloud Credential Operator is responsible for handling `CredentialsRequest` custom resource.
`CredentialsRequest`s allow OpenShift components to request credentials for a particular cloud provider.

On unsupported platforms the operator goes into no-op mode, which technically is mostly an equivalent
of the ["Manual"](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.11/authentication/managing_cloud_provider_credentials/cco-mode-manual.html)
mode.

Cloud Credential operator [uses](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/master/pkg/operator/controller.go#L74) an "actuator pattern"
and, in theory, in the future it might be extended in a way to react for the new "External" platform type and allow users to supplement their own
platform-specific credentials management logic.

> During initial enablement phases of "External" platform type, no specific actions won't be needed there, since

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
During initial enablement phases of "External" platform type, no specific actions will be needed there, since
```

> CCO [would](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/master/pkg/operator/controller.go#L134) goes

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
CCO [would](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/master/pkg/operator/controller.go#L134) go
```

into no-op mode if it encounters unrecognized platform.

#### Cluster Image Registry Operator

> For image registry a [storage backend config decision](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-image-registry-operator/blob/99474318db709a6d17d06468b90cdf0dc0fd2b87/pkg/storage/storage.go#L157) is a platform specific.

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
For image registry a [storage backend config decision](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-image-registry-operator/blob/99474318db709a6d17d06468b90cdf0dc0fd2b87/pkg/storage/storage.go#L157) is platform specific.
```

> On a "None" platform type Image Registry Operator goes into no-op state. For unknown platform image registry configured

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
On a "None" platform type Image Registry Operator goes into no-op state. For unknown platforms the image registry is configured
```

see-also:
- [OCP infrastructure provider onboarding guide](https://docs.providers.openshift.org/overview/)
- [Out-of-tree cloud provider integration support](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/cloud-integration/out-of-tree-provider-support.md)
- [Platform Operators Proposal](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1170)
- [Capabilites selection](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md)
---

# Introduce new platform type "External" in the OpenShift specific Infrastructure resource

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

This EP describes the addition of a new special platform type, referred here as "External".

The new "External" platform type would serve as a signal when OpenShift is running on an infrastructure platform

> that will receive supplemental components from the infrastructure provider.

Reviewer 3: Will the components be supplemental, replacement, or possibly both?

Since a lot of infrastructure related components (such as [CCCMO](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-cloud-controller-manager-operator), [Machine API operator](https://github.com/openshift/machine-api-operator), [Machine Config Operator](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator), and so on)
require information about, at least, the presence of an underlying cloud-provider, the "None" platform does not fit well as a signal in such situation.

Having a special, built-in, and somewhat generic platform type which will signal about the presence of an underlying infrastructure platform without
platform specific details will help to reduce the number of changes across OCP repositories
and simplify the initial integration work for non-Red Hat contributors.

Examples of difficulties which are present today due to having a predefined list of platforms:
- No defined mechanism to set `--cloud-provider=external` arg to kubelet/KCM/apiserver without merges and further revendoring of "openshift/api"
- No way to extend machine-api and deliver new provider without merges to "openshift/machine-api-operator" and "openshift/api" repos

### Conjunction with Capabilities 

> In the future, at some degree, [capabilites selection](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md)

Reviewer 2: I saw Ben reference the capabilities as a stop gap until platform operators are working, we may want to check with him what he meant by that https://coreos.slack.com/archives/CE4L0F143/p1662037439015329?thread_ts=1661966257.442659&cid=CE4L0F143

OpenShift can not be disabled and still requires a signal about underlying platform, for example KCM and MCO in respect of enablement of
[external cloud controller manager](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cloud-controller/).

One of the possible examples of the interaction of the capabilities with the "External" platform type would be the MachineAPI and the Machine Api Operator.
At this point, the MachineAPI has no use in running if there is no machine controller (which is heavily cloud-provider dependent).
"External" platform type will serve as a signal in the scenario when machine-api capability is enabled and the cluster deployer
going to satisfy the machine controller requirement. In this case, machine-api-operator would know what to do and deploy
only generic cloud-independent controllers (such as machine-healthcheck, machineset, and node-link controllers), such
behaviour will simplify initial cloud-platform enablement and will reduce the necessity of reverse-engineering and replicating a work
which was already done by Red Hat engineers.

### User Stories

> - As a cloud-provider affiliated engineer / platform integrator / RH partner

Reviewer 2: User stories are usually of the form "[who] wants [what] so that [why]", I would say right now that this story is missing the why part of that. IMO the why here is "so that I can inject my own platform specific controllers into OpenShift to improve the integration between OpenShift and my cloud provider"

You've kind of got it in the paragraphs below but we should be explicit IMO

  I want to have a mechanism to signal Openshift's built-in operators about additional
  cloud-provider specific components which should be delivered and managed by its own or manually.
  
  We are aware about examples of supplementing OKD installations with a custom machine-api controllers,
  however users are experiencing a lot of difficulties on this path due to necessity of, literally, reverse engineering,
  manual management of generic MAPI controllers and so on.

- As a cloud provider whose platform is not integrated into OpenShift,

>   I want to have the Cloud Controller Manager for my infrastructure running in OpenShift from the initial install.

Reviewer 2: Likewise here, finish this with the why

Author: Next sentence in this paragraph elaborates the why, IMHO...

### Non-Goals

- describe concrete delivery mechanisms for cloud-provider specific components
- cover new infrastructure provider enablement from RHCOS side
- describe specific changes for each affected component, aside no-op reaction to thew new "External" platform type

## Proposal

Extend the [PlatformType](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/51f399230d604fa013c2bb341040c4ad126e7309/config/v1/types_infrastructure.go#L128) "enum"
with a special value "External". Which would be similar to the "None" value during initial phase, but alongside adding support of this across
infrastructure related components it would change its semantic to signal when OpenShift is running on an infrastructure platform
that will receive supplemental components from the infrastructure provider.

### Implementation phases

For make such change implementation process more smooth, it would be natural to split this activity to phases.
The proposed phases breakdown can be found in [OCPPLAN-9429](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPPLAN-9429).

This document intended to describe initial phases of this project, proposed initial course of action:

1. Update "openshift/api" with adding "External" PlatformType

> 2. Ensure that all Red Hat operator tolerate the "External" platform and treat the same as "None" platform

Reviewer 2: Can you add some context as to why do this rather than go straight to step 3?

Next phase out of the scope for this EP:

3. Modify operators for doing specific things when seeing "External" platform. Briefly it would be described down below, where possible for the moment.

### Future work

There are a number of topics in this area which would be wise to defer for upcoming phases, namely:

1. Define missing capabilities and its concrete behaviour, for example add a "capability" for machine-api

> 2. Precisely define reaction of the operators listed below for the "External" platform type 

Reviewer 2: How do we know the current proposal will solve the issue if we don't explore this?

Author: We did explore this. Here is just a notion, that we do not want to describe components behaviour change in details within this EP.

Reviewer 2: As someone reading this without the same context as you/the others involved in the project, I don't know that from reading the enhancement. You should make sure that's obvious and perhaps link out to anywhere that folks can read more about this. 

IMO I would expect the enhancement to paint the whole picture rather than just the first phase but maybe that's asking too much 🤔

or, if a component manages something else (i.e. kubelet, kcm), adjust its behaviour (set `--cloud-provider=external` arg to kubelet for example).

Specific component changes will be described in details within separate enhancement documents on a per-component basis.

#### Machine Config Operator

Currently, MCO sets kubelet flags based on a [PlatformStatus and PlatformType](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/7babc03f84088f49072c6f5b0d1769850d09a694/pkg/controller/template/render.go#L343).
Such flag is [crucial](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/running-cloud-controller/#running-cloud-controller-manager) for Cloud Controller Manager engagement within the cluster.

Initially, the new "External" platform should be treated similarly to PlatformType "None" by the MCO, and do not set up any cloud-specific flags for the kubelet.
Then, down the road (during [phase 3](#implementation-phases)), it would be expected for the MCO to use the "External" platform type and its spec as a signal about the underlying platform and cloud controller manager presence and operate accordingly.

> For explicit signal about the necessity to set `--cloud-provider=external` flag to the kubelet, we could use the `CloudControllerManager` of the `ExternalPlatformSpec`, which is 

Reviewer: i would make this a little more definite
```suggestion
For an explicit signal about the necessity to set `--cloud-provider=external` flag to the kubelet, we will use the `CloudControllerManager` field of the `ExternalPlatformSpec`, which is 
```

> described in [API Extensions](#api-extensions) section down below.

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
described in the [API Extensions](#api-extensions) section down below.
```

#### Kube Controller Manager Operator

Same as the [MCO](#machine-config-operator) in regard to kubelet, Kube Controller Manager Operator manages KCM (kube-controller-manager) deployments.

Historically Kube Controller Manager was a home for cloud-specific control loops. This logic is also engaging by setting up proper
flags on KCM executable like,
```shell
...
--cloud-provider=azure
--cloud-config=/etc/kubernetes/cloud.conf
...
```

> For engaging an external Cloud Controller Manager no `cloud-provider` flag should be set for the KCM executable.

Reviewer 2: So? Does KCM actually need to know anything here? Sounds like KCMO just needs to know it's external and a CCM is installed, and set nothing, sounds quite easy? But then, if a CCM isn't installed, it has the same behaviour? So, does KCM actually care about this or can it behave like platform None always?

Author: >But then, if a CCM isn't installed, it has the same behaviour? So, does KCM actually care about this or can it behave like platform None always?

It doesn't care and can always behave as for None platform.

Actually kube doc says that `--cloud-provider` flag must not be set to the kcm, but as i can judge from this code: https://github.com/openshift/library-go/blob/f946ce665f858b213b687f40480ac34d0b26987e/pkg/operator/configobserver/cloudprovider/observe_cloudprovider.go#L79-L87 flag sets there.

Reviewer 2: Ok cool, so make sure to include that the KCMO doesn't need to do anything when platform is external, wrt to the cloud provider flag. I had thought it needed to check the infra object but looks like no

of the ["Manual"](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.11/authentication/managing_cloud_provider_credentials/cco-mode-manual.html)
mode.

Cloud Credential operator [uses](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/master/pkg/operator/controller.go#L74) an "actuator pattern"
and, in theory, in the future it might be extended in a way to react for the new "External" platform type and allow users to supplement their own
platform-specific credentials management logic.

During initial enablement phases of "External" platform type, no specific actions will be needed there, since
CCO [would](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/master/pkg/operator/controller.go#L134) go
into no-op mode if it encounters unrecognized platform.

#### Cluster Image Registry Operator

For image registry a [storage backend config decision](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-image-registry-operator/blob/99474318db709a6d17d06468b90cdf0dc0fd2b87/pkg/storage/storage.go#L157) is platform specific.
On a "None" platform type Image Registry Operator goes into no-op state. For unknown platforms the image registry is configured

> with EmptyDir storage. 

Reviewer 2: Empty dir isn't persistent, are we sure that's an appropriate action for a cloud provider integration? Does the PVC option exist already today? It isn't obvious from your wording in the next paragraph

Also, Image Registry storage options might be configured to use pvc backed or external storage systems
(such as Ceph or S3 compatible object storage) as a day 2 operation.

For now it seems that no particular action for the "External" platform type needed within Image Registry Operator,
since we're providing enough possibilities to customize Image Registry storage backend.

> #### Cluster Ingress Operator

Reviewer 2: I haven't reviewed past this point

Within the ingress operator PlatformType affects on two things:
1. Choosing EndpointPublishingStrategy, which is `HostNetworkStrategyType` for "None" and unknown PlatformType
2. Creating dns provider on some platforms. This logic does not engaged for "None" or unknown PlatformType

Speaking about `LoadBalancer` EndpointPublishingStrategy - Cluster Ingress Operator might be reconfigured for using it
as day2 operation. Operator itself  creates `Service` objects with correct provider-specific annotations, actual handling
of such objects happens in a provider-specific [cloud controller manager](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cloud-controller/).

#### Cluster Network Operator

TBD

### Workflow Description

Since proposed change intended to have no effect during initial implementation, no specific user interaction is expected.

> "External" platform type would be treated the same as "None" platform.

Reviewer: i think we should change this a little to say that during phase 1 there will be no expectation of change for the user, but that after phase 3 is complete we expect that a user could change the platform and set the spec, as well as capabilities, to customize their openshift deployments.

### API Extensions

> A new optional constant of `PlatformStatus` type will be added to the "openshift/api".

Reviewer: i'm a little confused about this part, should we talk about the platform type first?

```go
const (
	...
    // ExternalPlatformType represent generic infrastructure provider. Provider-specific components should be supplemented separately.
    ExternalPlatformType PlatformType = "External"
	...
)
```

> Additionally, respective external platform spec and status should be added to the infrastructure resource. 

Reviewer: minor nit
```suggestion
Additionally, the respective external platform spec and status should be added to the infrastructure resource. 
```

```go
type CloudControllerManagerMode string

const (
    // Cloud Controller Manager is enabled and expected to be supplied.
	// Signaling MCO to set `--cloud-provider=external` flag to the kubelets.
    CloudControllerManagerEnabled CloudControllerManagerMode = "Enabled"
    // No Cloud Controller Manager is expected to be supplied.
    // Signaling MCO not to set `--cloud-provider` flag to the kubelets.
    CloudControllerManagerDisabled CloudControllerManagerMode = "Disabled"
)

// ExternalPlatformSpec holds the desired state for the generic External infrastructure provider.
type ExternalPlatformSpec struct{
    // CloudControllerManager determines whether or not an external Cloud Controller Manager is expected to 
    // be presented in the cluster.
    // For engaging an external Cloud Controller Manager, certain flags are expected to be set to the kubelets.
    // https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/running-cloud-controller/#running-cloud-controller-manager
    //

>     // When enabled, the respective operator (machine config operator) should set `--cloud-provider=external` flag to the kubelet.

Reviewer 2: Will we allow users to change the state from Disabled -> Enabled, or Enabled -> Disabled, or both? Just wondering if there's any reason this shouldn't be reversible

Author: At this point I can not invent a really strong reasoning to prohibit to change this tbh. Think for now we should think about it as changeable thing.

    // When omitted or disabled, no `cloud-provider` flag should be set.

>     // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Enabled;Disabled

Reviewer 2: Will we allow users to change the state from Disabled -> Enabled, or Enabled -> Disabled, or both?

    // +optional

>     CloudControllerManager CloudControllerManagerMode `json:"cloudControllerManager,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: I really wonder if we should be making something more generic that turns on/off more things, having a single CCM flag means we can never add any additional configuration here, a struct may be better. I think we need to co-ordinate this effort with the PlatformOperators vision and capabilities API and work out exactly how the three will go together in the long term

Reviewer: i think that makes some sense about adding a struct to allow additional options in the future.

on the point about syncing with the PlatformOperators vision, imo this is a strong reason for us to start migrating this enhancement to the openshift/enhancements repo as a PR. i'd like to start getting wider feedback and i feel like we will be missing a lot of conversation if we keep adding here.

}

// ExternalPlatformStatus holds the current status of the generic External infrastructure provider.
type ExternalPlatformStatus struct{}
```

```go
type PlatformSpec struct {
    ...
    // External contains settings specific to the generic External infrastructure provider.
    // +optional
    External *ExternalPlatformSpec `json:"external,omitempty"`
}

type PlatformStatus struct {
	...
    // External contains settings specific to the generic External infrastructure provider.
    // +optional
    External *ExternalPlatformStatus `json:"external,omitempty"`
}
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

> TBD

Reviewer: you've mentioned it in other places, but i think we should mention the phase 1 limitation again here, namely that we will need all components to react as platform "none" when they see "external", wdyt?

Reviewer 2: This is where I'd expect the phase breakdown to live within this document rather than at the top.

I would focus on the end goal at the top

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Support burden
There is concern that *random* customers will use this feature out of context
and create support burden. However, using of such platform type in conjunction with [capabilites selection](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md)

> could give us a clear signals about how to properly triage 3d party created replacements for Red Hat components.

Reviewer: we might want to give an example here, eg "if a user has enabled external platform, and has the capability for machine-api enabled, we know that any bugs about the machine controller would be the responsibility of the user"

Reviewer 2: We may also want to mention that the platform cannot be changed once installed

### Drawbacks

Current approach with having statically defined platform list is already there, quite transparent and battle hardened.

> Changing it with adding new, way less specific platform type would mean a significant step away from current design patterns in this area.

Reviewer: my question here would be, what is the repercussion of this step away from our current designs?

Also, future support strategy is not completely clear due to we have plans around enablement of 3d party platform-specific components, which

> codebase would be mostly out of our control. 

Reviewer: instead of talking about the uncertainty here, i think we should talk about the need to develop idea about support and the related concerns. but, that those should be part of followup work.

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

- Should we explicitly communicate that the "External" platform is something that we do not support yet?

> - Should we gate the "External" platform addition behind the feature gate by generating separate CRD for TPNU clusters?

Reviewer 2: New features like this are being introduced as TPNU now, so yes, yes we should do this! David has some WIP to update our generators to support this

Author: Is there any enhancement/design document which we can refer there?

Reviewer 2: I know there's https://docs.google.com/document/d/1K2-zWyYQH-tHvPVwcKsPMxPJYNEOH5N3tENsBjDnqI0/edit#heading=h.c97miuz336km, but I don't think it became an enhancement

- Should we invest in preparing workflows that will perform UPI with the "None"/"External" platform types installation

>   on the AWS or GCP, or existed vSphere-based workflows would be enough?

Reviewer: +100, i want to see this escalated

### Test Plan

> During the first stages, we need to ensure that all OpenShift built-in operators treat the "External" platform type the same way as "None".

Reviewer 2: `All` sounds like a lot, we will need to enumerate these so that we have a complete list to update when we make library-go changes

However, given that vSphere is the only platform where we're exercising clusters installation with platform "None" specified,
it would be beneficial to develop additional workflows using a provider with better capacity and performance (AWS or GCP perhaps).

### Graduation Criteria

Given that `infrastructure.config.openshift.io` already released and have to be supported during whole major release lifecycle,
this change will be GAed from the beginning.

However, components behaviour changes might be gated with the featuregates. Specific graduation criteria for each
component should be defined separately in a respective enhancement documents.

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

This enhancement does not introduce any additional components, just describes changes in "openshift/api".

PlatformType expected to be set once, during cluster installation and does not expect to be changed, so adding new platform type
should not affect upgrade/downgrade process across existing clusters.

> 

Reviewer: i think we should make a note about 3rd operators needing to managed by the infrastructure providers, or through OLM deployments. those might have a separate upgrade/downgrade path than openshift.

### Version Skew Strategy

Since setting PlatformType is a day 0 operation, sets up during cluster installation and does not expect to be changed during cluster lifecycle,
version skew should not be the case there.

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

It should be no difference with another PlatformTypes. Scalability, API throughput and availability should not be affected.
At first phases it expected to work the same way as for PlatformType "None"

#### Failure Modes

- OpenShift built-in operators would not recognize new PlatformType and would go into Degraded or crashed.
This will break new clusters installations with that new "External" platform type.

#### Support Procedures

During first phases of this effort support procedures should be no different as for cluster with PlatformType equals "None"

> 

Reviewer: i think it would be nice to mention how we will triage external platform bugs here again.

- "@deads2k"
- "@JoelSpeed"
creation-date: yyyy-mm-dd
last-updated: yyyy-mm-dd
tracking-link:
- [OCPPLAN-9429](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPPLAN-9429)
- [OCPPLAN-8156](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPPLAN-8156)
see-also:
- [OCP infrastructure provider onboarding guide](https://docs.providers.openshift.org/overview/)
- [Out-of-tree cloud provider integration support](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/cloud-integration/out-of-tree-provider-support.md)
- [Platform Operators Proposal](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1170)
- [Capabilites selection](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md)
---

# Introduce new platform type "External" in the OpenShift specific Infrastructure resource

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

> ## Summary

Reviewer: i was talking with @JoelSpeed a little today about the enhancement and he mentioned having a trouble understanding the "big picture" from the enhancement. he mentioned that he clearly got the phase 1 parts of this but that he wants to know how it fits in the bigger story of what we are trying to do.

to that end, i think we should describe the "big picture" in the summary, and then make it clear that we are implementing phase 1. so, we should talk about why we are doing this on a bigger scale, something that describes how we will eventually have the external platform, with capabilities and platform operators, and our users will be able to utilize these features to deliver custom infrastructure-specific operators and components during the openshift install. the end goal being for users/partners to create seamless installations of openshift on their own infrastructure platform without the need to integrate code directly into openshift.

i think you have the elements of that here, but we are leaving too much to be inferred by the reader. we should plainly state the end goal in the summary to make it more explicit. we might also end with a full example here, we can use the ever popular MomAndPop Cloud. for example, "imagine MomAndPop Cloud have created an infrastructure platform that resembles AWS but has it's own API that is different than AWS. they would like to give their users the best OpenShift experience possible, but integrating their code into a Red Hat release is not possible for them. Using the external platform, capabilities, and platform operators, they can still deliver this functionality by creating their own Cloud Controller Managers, CSI drivers, network topology operators, Machine API controllers, and OpenShift configurations. This allows MomAndPop Cloud to continue providing the best OpenShift experience while also developing their components without the necessity of tying to Red Hat's internal processes or keeping a fork of the entire code base."

Author: added extended summary section

platform type should be handled the same as the "None", so no specific user interaction is expected.

### API Extensions

A new optional constant of `PlatformType` type will be added to the "openshift/api".

```go
const (
	...
    // ExternalPlatformType represent generic infrastructure provider. Provider-specific components should be supplemented separately.
    ExternalPlatformType PlatformType = "External"
	...
)
```

Additionally, the respective external platform spec and status should be added to the infrastructure resource.

```go
type CloudControllerManagerMode string

const (
    // Cloud Controller Manager is enabled and expected to be supplied.
	// Signaling MCO to set `--cloud-provider=external` flag to the kubelets.
    CloudControllerManagerEnabled CloudControllerManagerMode = "Enabled"
    // No Cloud Controller Manager is expected to be supplied.
    // Signaling MCO not to set `--cloud-provider` flag to the kubelets.
    CloudControllerManagerDisabled CloudControllerManagerMode = "Disabled"
)

// ExternalPlatformSpec holds the desired state for the generic External infrastructure provider.

> type ExternalPlatformSpec struct{

Reviewer: @lobziik , i was talking with Ju yesterday and she raised a point about external platform users having the ability to specify how their platform is identified. one of the reasons she mentioned is to help identify the various external platforms that we see in the telemetry. currently for platform none this is a an issue that causes to basically assume that all none platform installation are bare metal. i think we should add a string field in the spec that is required to be filled out, it doesn't need to be validated but just something to allow the user to identify the platform.

Author: added provider name into status to address this
